# Introduction To Programming (Duration: 1 week)
## Basic Programming Knowledge (Maynard)
### 1. Data source and storage
#### Literals
Literals are data/values that are hard coded in the source file. Examples are number (`3`), string (`"hello"`), array (`[1,2,3]`) and hash (`{ :key => 'value' }`) literals.

In this code,
` x = 5 `,
the value of `x` is *literally* `5`. Compare that to
` x = y `,
where the value of x is **not** literally `y`, but what the value of `y` is. That's because `y` is not a literal (it could be a method or variable)

#### Variables
Variables are used to store values for later reference. Since **Ruby** is a *loosely typed* language, you can assign any data type to a variable.

```
x = 123
x = "hello"
x = { :key => value }
x = [1, 2, 3]
```

In Ruby, a variable is *defined* the moment that it is *passed* in the code (not necessarily executed or assigned a value). Variables have an initial value of `nil` until they are assigned a different value.

```
> puts abc
NameError: undefined local variable or method `abc' for main:Object
> if false
>   abc = 123
> end
> puts abc # abc == nil, and nil is printed as emptry string

> abc = 234
> puts abc
234
```

#### methods
Methods are sets of expressions that return a value. They are commonly used for abstraction, isolation and reuse of code.

### 2. Data transformation
#### Math Stuff (for numbers)
#### Content Transformation (for strings, hashes, arrays, etc.)
#### Form Transformation (for others like hash to pdf)

### 3. Data persistence and retrieval
#### persistence / saving
#### retrieval

### 4. Data presentation
#### printing to console
#### generating / displaying web pages
#### creating files

## Ruby Introduction
### 1. Data structures (Maynard)
#### Arrays
#### Dictionaries (i.e. Hashtables)
#### Trees
#### Enums
  
### 2. Variable Scoping (Maynard)
#### Global ($)
#### Class (@@)
#### Instance (@)
#### Local (within methods, blocks and loops)

### 3. Loops and Iterators (Jayson)
#### While loop
#### Each
#### Select
#### Map
#### Break
#### Next

### 4. Conditionals (Jayson)
#### If Else
#### Unless

### 5. Methods in Ruby (Raymond)
#### Class and instance methods
#### Parameters
#### Passing block and yielding

### 6. Procedural Programming (Emmanuel)
### 7. Object-Oriented Programming (Emmanuel)
