# Terminal for Unix & OSX

## Table of Contents
  * Introduction
    * What is a shell?
    * What is a terminal?
      * `Terminal.app`
      * `iTerm.app`
  * Bash Basics
    * Using `man` and `apropos`
    * echo
    * Environment variables / Paths
      * `$PATH` and other environment variables
      * `$HOME`
    * Navigation
      * '.', '..', and '/'
      * pwd
      * ls
      * cd
    * File Handling
      * mkdir
      * rm
      * cp
      * mv
      * cat
      * less, more (moving/searching through the file)
      * head
      * tail
      * touch
      * wc
      * grep
      * find
      * which
      * file
      * stat
      * ln (linked file)
      * Ownership and permissions
        * chmod
        * chown
    * Processes
      * ps
      * kill
      * pkill, pgrep
      * top
    * `bash_profile`
    * UNIX pipes
    * Jobs
      * Ctrl+z
      * fg
      * jobs
    * Tricks
      * Up/Down
      * !$, !!
      * Bash keyboard shortcuts
      * history, !number and ctrl+r
      * Brace expansion
  * Bonus
    * bash scripting
      * if-then; conditions
    * useradd, userdel and other system administration stuff
    * vim
    * SSH and file management using `scp`, `smv`

## Introduction

### What is a shell?

The shell accepts input from the standard input and prints results to the standard output.
It accesses the operating system's services. Most of the time, when we say shell, we refer
to command line interface shells. This means that we type in to the keyboard the command we wish
to run in the shell prompt (usually a % or $) and wait for the OS to do something,
until we see the shell prompt again, meaning we can type in the next command.

### What is a terminal?

A terminal basically allows the user to access the shell.

#### Terminal.app and iTerm2.app

In OSX, there is an application called `Terminal.app`.
This is a very basic terminal application which is the only thing you need.
You can open `Terminal` by typing in `Terminal` in Spotlight or running the `Terminal.app` from Finder in the `Applications` folder.

There is also a popular alternative to `Terminal.app` called `iTerm2`. `iTerm2` has some very handy features,
like splitting panes vertically and horizontally, as well as sending keystrokes to all panes. Most of the time though,
`Terminal.app` is good enough. You can download iTerm2 [here](http://iterm2.com/).

## Bash Basics

Bash is a Unix shell written as a replacement for the Bourne shell (sh).
It is the default shell for Linux and Mac OS X.

### Using `man` and `apropos`

The `man` command allows the user to view the **manual** of the
specified command. For example, if we want to see the `Bash`'s documentation, we can issue the command `man bash`.

There you'll be able to read what the command does, or what arguments you can specify  when issuing the `bash` command, among other things. For example:

>        -i        If the -i option is present, the shell is interactive.

We will be showing lots of commands during this session, so knowing
about man will be extremely useful at this point.

#### `man`'s cousin: `apropos`

Another command, the `apropos` command, allows you to search through the
entire list of manuals using a key word if you are not sure which command
you want to call.  For example, you want to know what commands are related to
processes.

```bash
$ apropos process
```

will give you a list of functions that are related to processes.

### `echo`

Allows you to write the standard input.

#### Standard Input, Standard Output, Standard Error

STDIN = data going to the program
STDOUT = where the program writes it's output data.
STDERR = like STDOUT; only where programs write diagnostics or error messages.

[Additional Reading](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams).

### Environment Variables

Set of dynamic named values that can affect the way running processes
will behave on a computer.

Type in `env` to see the list of environment variables set in the
shell. You'll be able to see variables like

* `$HOME'` - your home directory When you launch the terminal app,
  you normally go to your user's `$HOME` directory.
* `$PATH` - where the shell will look for the executables you issue
  (unless you specify the full path)

[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable).

## Navigation

#### Paths

The system is made up of files and directories. We access the files and directories with their path.
### `.`, `..`, `/`


`/` is the root directory. The absolute path of a file/directory is just a
description of a file or directory's position within a hierarchy of directories.

For example, let's say we have a path: `/home/deploy/apps/myapp`.

`home` is in the root directory; `deploy` is in `home` and so on; with `/` as a path separator for the system.

`..` means one step closer the root directory., while `.` means no change in the
hierarchy. So `/home/deploy/./myapps` is just `/home/deploy/myapps`, and
`/home/deploy/../myapps` is `/home/myapps`.

### `pwd`

To know the current working directory, type `pwd`.

For example, the `pwd` would display `/Users/inDinero`. This is an absolute path. `Users` is a directory under the
the `/`, which is the root path, while `inDinero` is another directory inside `Users`.

`.` means the current path, while `..` the parent of the path.

### `ls`

To list the files and directories of the current working directory, use the `ls` shell command.
The output returned to the user will change depending on the argument the user gives to the `ls` command.

#### Anatomy of the shell command

```
$                  ls          -al           .
^ command prompt   ^ command   ^ argument    ^ another argument
```

#### Continuing on `ls`

Here's an example of the output of `ls`:

```
$ ls -alh
total 7992
drwxr-xr-x+  94 inDinero  staff     3196 Sep 29 15:33 .
drwxr-xr-x    5 root      admin      170 Jan  6  2014 ..
lrwxr-xr-x    1 inDinero  staff       36 Jan  6  2014 .vimrc -> /Users/inDinero/.vim/janus/vim/vimrc
drwx------+ 110 inDinero  staff     3740 Sep 26 07:53 Desktop
drwx------+   9 inDinero  staff      306 Aug  5 15:04 Documents
drwx------+ 230 inDinero  staff     7820 Sep 26 10:22 Downloads
drwx------@   7 inDinero  staff      238 May  5 07:31 Dropbox
drwx------@  54 inDinero  staff     1836 Aug 13 06:31 Library
-rw-r--r--    1 inDinero  staff      312 Aug 22 09:17 charges.txt
drwxr-xr-x   32 inDinero  staff     1088 Sep 29 14:30 code
-rw-r--r--    1 inDinero  staff    72586 Mar 12  2014 hello.txt
-rw-r--r--    1 inDinero  staff   336240 Mar 13  2014 hello2.txt
```

### `cd`

To change directories, use `cd`.

## File Handling

This section describes the basic commands for file/directory handling.

### `mkdir`

To create a directory, use the `mkdir` command.

```
$ mkdir dir1
$ mkdir -p this/will/create/the/whole/path/all/the/way/down
```

### `rm`

To delete/unlink a file, use the `rm` command. Be careful though, the `rm`
without any options will delete the file with prompting the user, and
there is no Recycle Bin. A recommendation is `alias` `rm` to `rm -i`.
The `-i` argument means interactive and will prompt the user before
deleting the file.

### `cp`

To copy a file, use the `cp` command. `cp` also works with directories.

```
$ cp file new_file             # this will copy file to new_file, overwrite if it exists
$ cp -r orig_dir dest_dir      # this will copy the orig_dir recursively to dest_dir
```

### `mv`

To move a file, use the `mv` command. `mv` also works with directories.

```
$ mv myfile dest_file
$ mv dir new_dir
```

### `cat`

To show a stream out to `STDOUT`, use the `cat` command.

```
$ ls hello.*
hello       hello.txt
$ cat hello
HELLO, WORLD!
$
```

### `less`, `more`

`less` and `more` commands allow the user to view the contents a file.
