Advanced Ruby concepts

### FileIO (Jossie)
    
## In this chapter, you will learn how to read from and write to files.
In most real-world applications, you’ll be working with datasets that are too large to include in a program in a predefined string or collection.

### What is a file?
A file is a collection of data or information that has a name, called the filename. Almost all information stored in a computer must be in a file.
There are many different types of files: data files, text files, program files, directory files, and so on. Different types of files store different types of information. For example, program files store programs, whereas text files store text.

## Creating a file and writing to it
### What is the `File` class?
The `File` class supplies the basic methods to manipulate files. For example, you use the `File` class to read a file and write something to the file.

Example script:
```ruby
fname = "sample.txt"
somefile = File.open(fname, "w")
somefile.puts "Hello file!"
somefile.close
```
The above script opens a new texfile in **`write`** mode and then writes "Hello file!" to it.


1. The first line sets fname to just a string that represents the filename. Again, fname is just the filename, not the actual file itself. This also works:
  ```ruby
  somefile = File.open("sample.txt", "w")
  somefile.puts "Hello file!"
  somefile.close
  ```
2. The next line invokes the File class method **open**, which requires us to pass it two arguments:
  1. the *filename*, which is represented by a String
  2. the *mode*
  In our example we used "w" mode which stands for *write*.
3. The File class has its own **puts** method. This one prints to the file instead of to the screen.
   You can also use **write**, which does not include a newline character at the end of the string.
4. The **close** method finishes the writing process and prevents any further data operations of the file.

## Opening a file using Different Modes in Ruby
Ruby lets you open a file with different permissions (modes). You can open a file in a *read only mode*, *write only mode*, or a *read-write mode*, for example.

The syntax to open a file in a mode is as follows:
```ruby
file = File.open ("yourfilenamehere.txt", "mode")
```
If you don’t specify any mode, it will default to a *read-only mode*.

### Different Modes available
**Read Only** - Read only permission is denoted by **r**. The read only mode is the default mode. The file pointer points to the beginning of the file, by default. If you open a file as read only, you cannot edit it or change it in any way.
```ruby
file = File.open('myfile.txt', 'r')
```

**Write Only** - Write only permission is denoted by **w**. This mode should be used when you only want to add data or rather write into a file. If you set a file to write only, you will not be able to read back from it. The file pointer starts at the beginning of the file. The file, if it exists, is overwritten. Otherwise, a new file is created.
```ruby
file = File.open('myfile.txt', 'w')
```

**Append Only** - Append/Write only permission  is denoted by **a**. The main difference from the previous option is that the file pointer starts at the end of the file. This means the existing data in the file is not overwritten. We can only add on to it. If the file doesn't exist, a new file is created.
```ruby
file = File.open('myfile.txt', 'a')
```

**Read-write permission r+** - Read- write permission is denoted by **r+**. You can both read and modify a file with this. The file pointer starts at the beginning of the file by default, enabling you to start reading from the very beginning.
```ruby
file = File.open('myfile.txt', 'r+')
```

**Read-write permission w+** - Like the previous mode, this one also opens a file with both read and write permissions. However, this command removes all existing data in the file, and effectively overwrites an existing file. If a file with the specified name does not exist, you a new file is created.
```ruby
file = File.open('myfile.txt', 'w+')
```

**Read-write permission a+** - This is similar to the **w+** mode, with the difference that the pointer is positioned at the end of the file. This means we append to the file and do not overwrite it. If the file exists, it can be appended. If it doesn’t exist, a new file is created.
```ruby
file = File.open('myfile.txt', 'a+')
```

**Binary File mode b** - This mode is used along with the permissions given above. It can only be run in DOS/Windows.
```ruby
file = File.open('myfile.txt', 'b')
```






### Metaprogramming (Psalmuel)
## Being a Meta

### What is Metaprogramming?
Metaprogramming is what makes Ruby awesome. Metaprogramming is writing code that manipulates language constructs (like classes, modules, and instance variables) at runtime. It is even possible to enter new Ruby code at runtime and execute the new code without restarting the program. It's the living embodiment of DRY in in Ruby


Example Code:

```ruby
class Array
  def foldl(method)
    inject {|result, i| result ? result.send(method, i) : i }
  end
end

puts [1000.0, 200.0, 50.0].foldl("/")
```

### Open Classes
In Ruby, classes are never closed. You can always re-open existing Ruby classes, even standard library classes such as String or Array, and modify them on the fly.

Example:

```ruby
class String
  def words
    self.split(' ');
  end
end

puts "Try to do this".words 
# => ['Try', 'to', 'do', 'this']
```


 - RegEx
 	- Maru

 - Mini::Test
 	- Emmanuel

 - Threading/concurrency
 	- Me

 - Authoring Gems
    - 

 
By: Team Outsync
