# Introduction to Ruby on Rails

## What is Ruby on Rails (or just Rails for short)

Rails is a web application development framework written in the Ruby language. It is designed to make programming web applications easier by making assumptions about what every developer needs to get started. It allows you to write less code while accomplishing more than many other languages and frameworks. Experienced Rails developers also report that it makes web application development more fun.

Rails is opinionated software. It makes the assumption that there is the "best" way to do things, and it's designed to encourage that way - and in some cases to discourage alternatives. If you learn "The Rails Way" you'll probably discover a tremendous increase in productivity. If you persist in bringing old habits from other languages to your Rails development, and trying to use patterns you learned elsewhere, you may have a less happy experience.

The Rails philosophy includes two major guiding principles:

- **Don't Repeat Yourself**: DRY is a principle of software development which states that "Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system." By not writing the same information over and over again, our code is more maintainable, more extensible, and less buggy.
- **Convention Over Configuration**: Rails has opinions about the best way to do many things in a web application, and defaults to this set of conventions, rather than require that you specify every minutiae through endless configuration files.

Although Rails takes away a lot of the actual work that needs to be done when writing web applications, as it is written in Ruby, you skip, circumvent and even override the defaults that Rails provides for you.  This will be covered in more advanced chapters but for now, we'll be focusing on doing things the Rails Way.

# Getting Started

## Installing Rails

First off, make sure your machine has rails installed.

For starters, on your terminal run 

> gem install rails

This will install the latest version of the rails gem on your machine.  

If you want to have a specific version of the rails gem, you need to pass the -v option like so:

> gem install rails -v=3.2.19

Once installed (or that you have confirmed that your machine has rails installed), you can now start a new project.

## Creating a new rails project

To create a new project in rails, type:

> rails new <Project Name>

If you need more options, just run the rails new command with the -h flag like so:

> rails new -h

For our purposes, we'll use the project name "BootcampBlog" 

> rails new BootcampBlog -d mysql

Breaking down the command above, this will create a project called BootcampBlog and specify the database adapter as mysql.  We can ommit this and just manually edit the generated file responsible for holding that details for the connection to the database but to make things easier, we use the flag to set it directly to the database that we'll be using.

Once the command completes running you will now have a directory called BootcampBlog in your present working directory.  This contains the whole rails app.  Open this project in your preferred text editor and explore it -- in the case of SublimeText:

> sublime BootcampBlog

# The rails app structure

Once you have the BootcampBlog project opened you should be able to see the following folders:

### app/

Contains the controllers, models, views, helpers, mailers and assets for your application. As this contains most of the files needed for the app, you'll be focusing on this folder a lot.
	
### bin/

Contains the rails script that starts your app and can contain other scripts you use to deploy or run your application.

### config/

config/	Configure your application's routes, database, and more. This is covered in more detail in Configuring Rails Applications.

### config.ru

Rack configuration for Rack based servers used to start the application.  Rails is a Rack app.  For more information about what Rack is: http://stackoverflow.com/a/2257031


### db/

Contains your current database schema, as well as the database migrations.

### Gemfile and Gemfile.lock
These files allow you to specify what gem dependencies are needed for your Rails application. These files are used by the Bundler gem. For more information about Bundler, see the Bundler website: http://bundler.io/

### lib/

Extended modules for your application.


### log/

Application log files.

### public/

The only folder seen by the world as-is. Contains static files and compiled assets.

### Rakefile

This file locates and loads tasks that can be run from the command line. The task definitions are defined throughout the components of Rails. Rather than changing Rakefile, you should add your own tasks by adding files to the lib/tasks directory of your application.

### README.rdoc

This is a brief instruction manual for your application. As this is the file that most code repositories read first, this is usually the first file that you edit when you start a new project.  The readme should contain important information like what your application does, how to set it up, and so on.

### test/

Unit tests, fixtures, and other test apparatus. For our project however, we'll be using the more popular gem called rspec thus leaving this folder unused.

### tmp/

Temporary files (like cache, pid, and session files).

### vendor/

A place for all third-party code. In a typical Rails application this includes vendored gems.

We'll dive into the folder structure as we go through the lessons but for the moment, the most important parts that you should take note of are the config and app folders.

## Booting up rails

Now that you've seen the prelimenary form of the rails application we'll be working on, let's fire it up shall we?

The basic requirment that we need to check is to see if the database adapter that we specified is running.  Since we created BootcampBlog with mysql as the default database, we just need to run:

>  mysql.server status

If you see that it's not running, just issue the following command:

> mysql.server start

Once that's done, issue the status check again to verify that it is indeed running (this secondary check is necessary sometimes as there are times when mysql reports that it successfully started but when you try to connect, you'll find that it actually crashed).

Since this is a new project, we need to make sure that we have a database to connect to.  Not to worry, you don't need to fire up the mysql cli for this since rails provides the tools for you.  

Just run 

> rake db:create

There will be no message to confirm that the command you just ran worked properly however :|  To verify if the database has indeed been created, log in to your mysql instance and run:

> show databases;

You should have the following tables created:

> |  |
> |--------------------------|
> | information_schema       |
> | BootcampBlog_development |
> | BootcampBlog_test        |

As you add more and more features to your application sometimes you end up adding more services that your app is dependent on like redis, memcached, mongodb, etc.  To make sure that your rails app will start, you need to make sure each of these services are running beforehand.  Of course as developers, we usually prefer to automate this but for now, we'll make do with starting each process by hand to make sure we don't forget them (and to get into the habit).

Now that we have all the prequisites running, we need to start the server.

Just issue this command on your terminal:

> rails server

You should see something like this:

> -> Booting WEBrick

> -> Rails 3.2.15 application starting in development on http://0.0.0.0:3000

> -> Call with -d to detach

> -> Ctrl-C to shutdown server

> [2014-09-25 13:48:01] INFO  WEBrick 1.3.1

> [2014-09-25 13:48:01] INFO  ruby 1.9.3 (2014-05-14) [x86_64-darwin13.0.0]

> [2014-09-25 13:48:01] INFO  WEBrick::HTTPServer#start: pid=15958 port=3000

Now open your browser and type in:

> http://localhost:3000

You will now see the default readme for all new rails applications :D