Starting with your first Rails Application
=========

Now that we have the rails server up and running, let's start writing some code so you can get a handle on how Rails does things.

## The Controller

First off, let's replace the default Rails page.  You'll be seeing this with every Rails application you create so it'll get old quick.  Let's start things by this simple set of tasks:

1. create a new controller
2. displaying something other than Hello World on the app
3. make this the 'root' url

## Creating a new controller

Creating Rails-specific files can be done in two ways:
1. running the `rails generate` command
2. creating the files manually

Both methods have their pros and cons.  For now let's start with the automated method using the rails command.

    Note:

    The `rails` command does quite a few things.  If you remember in the last chapter, we started our server using `rails server`.  

    To get a complete list of commands that you can do with rails, just run `rails` in the command line without any arguments.

    For help regarding any commands chained with `rails` just type `rails <command> --help`

To create our controller, we simply run: `rails generate controller Welcome`

This will generate a controller named welcome_controller.rb with WelcomeController declared inside in it.  Note the naming convention as this will help you differential a controller, a helper, a model, etc.

The alternative to running the command of course is to create this manually via our text editor.

The pros for command line generation?  Speed.  It gives us a simple shortcut to create files with using rails convention without thinking much about it.  There's also a lot of options available for us to make things creation easier like automatically creating controllers with additional methonds, etc.  Feel free to experiment with the `rails generate controller` as you see fit :D.

The downside of course is that it's only useful during creation :|.

As for creating this manually, it's just important to follow convention:

    #file named some_controller.rb

    class SomeController > ApplicationController

    end

For our purposes, a controller extends the ApplicationController class which gives us a bunch of methods useful for handling requests.  In ruby, we can have our classes any name we want but in Rails, we usually get a warning message when we don't follow conventions.

Now that we have a controller for our Rails application, the next question is what does the controller do exactly?  If you've read about the concept of MVC, the controller is responsible for handling requests from the client.  Usually, you have one controller to manage the requests for a specific area of your application (this is not true in some cases but we won't cover that for now).

The controller alone won't work because the rails application doesn't know know how to route things yet so we'll have to manually configure this first.  But seeing as it's the first item for our exercise let's start with creating an action for our controller

    def hello

    puts 'this is from the controller'

    end

We don't have a way of making this accessible via url yet so if you try accessing the url `http://localhost:3000/hello` you'll get a routing error.  To fix that, we now move on to the routes.

## The router

Open up the file config/routes.rb

As described above, we still need to wire up our application so rails so that can properly point the request to the proper controller.  The router is basically a map of our application that's navigable via requests.

*Note:  What will follow will only be a basic outline of routing as it will be discussed in full later on*

To make the **`hello `action** accessible via the url, let's add a route.

    get 'hello' => 'some#hello'

Save the routes.rb file and visit `http://localhost:3000/hello` again. You should see something else now.

You're now seeing the text `this is from the controller` which is rendered by the controller.  You can verify this by looking at the logs from the rails server.

Now this isn't exactly useful aside from displaying a quick message so let's change this to something else.

## The view

Remove the code within the hello method and replace it with the one below:
    @message = 'This a message from the controller'

Then create this file `app/views/some/hello.html.erb` and put this line inside it:  

    <b>This is from the view</b> : <%= @message %>.

Save and refresh the page.

You should now see the message

    **This is from the view** : This a message from the controller

A lot of things are happening now huh?

The controller sets the `@message` variable and it gets read by the `hello.html.erb` file so it can be displayed.  

`@message` variable is called an instance variable.  It only exists within a single request and is no longer available in the next one (i.e redirects) unless explicitly assigned.

`hello.html.erb` is the part of the view.  The erb extension means it contains ruby code so the compiler will read and execute the code within the <% %> tags first before converting it to html.  Do note that the extension for the view is important and it's possible to chain multiple formats it succession (as long as you know what you are doing so something like `hello.html.jst.xml.erb` is possible, but it's going to be a headache to use.

## Exercises

1.  Read up on rendering formats.  Make a controller that has a route for the display action that will display a list of names in the format requested.  The app should be able to respond properly to /display, /display.csv, /display.json.  
2.  Read up on passing parameters. Let's build a 5-page wizard.  Build a 5 page sign up form.  The first page will have a single text box and each succeeding page will have a new text box with information from the previous page.
  The form should contain `first name`, `last name`, `middle initial`, `email`, `password`

## The model

There's only so much we can do while relying on user input so now we'll start persisting stuff into the database.  Do note that while Rails abstracts us from most of the database interactions, it's still better to know what's going on in the underlying code (the SQL equivalent, etc) rather than relying on magic.  

First off, let's create a model.  The controller earlier doesn't really do much so we'll drop it for now and move on to something a bit more useful.

Create a model for a user object:

    rails generate model User first_name:string last_name:string middle_name:string email:string gender:string age:integer unique_features:text
    
The rails generate command will generate file named `app/models/user.rb` and create the proper migration for `create_users` with the columns that we mentioned.  This is the equivalent of the following commands:

    rails generate model User 
    rails generate migration create_users first_name:string last_name:string middle_name:string email:string gender:string age:integer unique_features:text --force
Now that we have a migration for users, let's migrate it so we can start writing to the database:
    
    rake db:migrate
Now, at the moment this is only available for the `rails console` and we'll need a way to get the application to save the user input into the db.  We'll get to that later.  For now let's play around with the model.

To instantiate a user, we just need to issue:

    user = User.new

And now we have an instance of the User model to play with.  

    user.first_name = 'Lorem'
    user.last_name = 'Ipsum'
    user.email = 'lorem@ipsum.com'
    user.gender = 'female'
    user.unique_features = 'lorem ipsum etc'

The columns of the Users table is now available to us as getter and setter methods (i.e. first_name can be used to set the first_name or get the first_name to and from the database).

To save this, we just need to issue `user.save`

Now we have a user in our database.

## Exercise
Create 10 users, with each user having a unique first name.  The rest can be similar.

### Querying using ActiveRecord

Now that we have 10 records in our db, we can proceed with the basic sql queries.
    User.first
    User.last
    User.where(last_name: 'Ipsum')
    User.where(first_name: 'Lorem).where(last_name: 'Ipsum')
    
## Exercise
Find out how to do a query using OR

Now that we've seen the basics of the controller, view and model already under our belts, let's put it into practical use.

## Exercise
Create a user registration form.  The HTML form should be able submit the user details and when the creation is successful, the app should render a page to display this.  This follows the CRUD design: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete

There should also be a way to view the list of users that have registered.

Checklist of things to do:
- Form to fill out info
- Controller to handle the submission and save
- Display the saved info after the creation was successful
- Page to display the list of users