## Models and Active Record

### In this chapter, we will take you through the basics of a database to help you bend it to your will using ActiveRecord

### What is Relational Database?
A relational database is a collection of data items organized as a set of formally-described tables from which data can be accessed or reassembled in many different ways without having to reorganize the database tables.

### What is Active Record?
Active Record is the M in MVC - the model - which is the layer of the system responsible for representing business data and logic. Active Record facilitates the creation and use of business objects whose data requires persistent storage to a database.

## Getting Started with Active Record Models
### Creating Active Record Models

It is very easy to create Active Record models. All you have to do is to subclass the ActiveRecord::Base class and you're good to go:

Example script:
```ruby
class Product < ActiveRecord::Base
end
```
or you can just create from the console using the script `rails g model model_name`. Using this script would also generate a migration file which would be discuss later but for now, suppose that products table was already created using an SQL sentence like:

```sql
CREATE TABLE products (
   id int(11) NOT NULL auto_increment,
   name varchar(255),
   description varchar(255),
   PRIMARY KEY  (id)
);
```

As of now, we have created our `Product` model, mapped to a products table at the database with a field name.

## CRUD: Reading and Writing Data
CRUD is an acronym for the four verbs we use to operate on data: Create, Read, Update and Delete. Active Record automatically creates methods to allow an application to read and manipulate data stored within its tables.

### C - Create

Active Record objects can be created from a hash, a block or have their attributes manually set after creation. The new method will return a new object while create will return the object and save it to the database.

In our first example, given our model `Product` with attributes name and description, we will use the `create` method which will create and save a new record into the database automatically:

```ruby
product = Product.create(name:"Phil's Best Juice", description:"made from Philippine Carabao Mangoes")
```
In our next example, again given our model `Product`, we will use the `new` by which an object will be instantiated without being saved:

```ruby
product = Product.new
product.name = "Earl Grey Tea"
product.description = "Full Leaf Black Tea"
```  

A call to `product.save` will commit the record to the database.

### R - Read

Active Record provides a rich API for accessing data within a database. Below are a few examples of different data access methods provided by Active Record.

```ruby
# return a collection of all products
products = Product.all
```

```ruby
# returns the first product found
product = Product.first
```

```ruby
# returns the first product named Earl Grey Tea
product = Product.find_by(name: "Earl Grey Tea")
```

```ruby
# find all products named Phil's Best Juice 
product = Product.where(name: "Phil's Best Juice")
```

### U - Update

Once an Active Record object has been retrieved, its attributes can be modified and it can be saved to the database

```ruby
product = Product.first
product.name = "New and Improve Phil's Best Juice"
product.save
```
A shortcut for this is to use a hash mapping attribute using `update` method

```ruby
product = Product.first
product.update(name:"New Phil's Best Mango Juice")
```
Updating several attributes at once
```ruby
Product.update_all(description: "High Quality Philippine Products")
```

### D - Delete

Likewise, once retrieved an Active Record object can be destroyed which removes it from the database,

```ruby
product = Product.first
product.destroy
```

## Migrations

Rails Migration allows you to use Ruby to define changes to your database schema, making it possible to use a version control system to keep things synchronized with the actual code. Migration support all basic data types.

### What can Rails Migration do?

```ruby
create_table(name, options)

drop_table(name)

rename_table(old_name, new_name)

add_column(table_name, column_name, type, options)

rename_column(table_name, column_name, new_column_name)

change_column(table_name, column_name, type, options)

remove_column(table_name, column_name)

add_index(table_name, column_name, index_type)

remove_index(table_name, column_name)
```

### Creating a Migration file

This syntax will create the file in **db/migrate/001_table_migration_name.rb**.

*rails generate migration table_migration_name*

Example

*rails generate migration books*

Then Here's a migration that creates a table:

```ruby
class Books < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :books do |t|
      t.column :title, :string, :limit => 32, :null => false
      t.column :price, :float
      t.column :subject_id, :integer
      t.column :description, :text
    end
  end
end
```
Now we have created all the required migration files, its time to execute them against the database. To do this, go to a command prompt and go to the library directory, in which the application is located, and then type rake migrate command as follows:

*rake db:migrate*

## Active Record Validations and Callbacks

There are two kinds of Active Record objects: those that correspond to a row inside your database and those that do not. 

The following methods trigger validations, and will save the object to the database only if the object is valid:

* create
* create!
* save
* save!
* update
* update_attributes
* update_attributes! 

* Note: The bang versions (e.g. save!) raise an exception if the record is invalid. The non-bang versions don’t: save and update_attributes return false, create and update just return the objects. *

The following methods skip validations, and will save the object to the database regardless of its validity. They should be used with caution.

* decrement!
* decrement_counter
* increment!
* increment_counter
* toggle!
* touch
* update_all
* update_attribute
* update_column
* update_counters

* Note: save also has the ability to skip validations if passed :validate => false as argument. This technique should be used with caution. *
  * save(:validate => false) *


### Validation Helpers

Active Record offers many pre-defined validation helpers that you can use directly inside your class definitions. These helpers provide common validation rules. Every time a validation fails, an error message is added to the object’s errors collection, and this message is associated with the attribute being validated

* acceptance
* validates_associated
* confirmation
* exclusion
* format
* inclusion
* length
* numericality
* presence
* uniqueness

## Active Record Association

In Rails, an association is a connection between two Active Record models. Associations are implemented using macro-style calls, so that you can declaratively add features to your models. For example, by declaring that one model belongs_to another, you instruct Rails to maintain Primary Key–Foreign Key information between instances of the two models, and you also get a number of utility methods added to your model.

### Types of Associations 

* belongs_to
* has_one
* has_many
* has_many :through
* has_one :through
* has_and_belongs_to_many

## belongs_to Association

A belongs_to association sets up a one-to-one connection with another model, such that each instance of the declaring model “belongs to” one instance of the other model. 

Lets Assume that we have a Categories Model and our Product belongs to categories.

```ruby
class Product < ActiveRecord::Base
  belongs_to :category
end
```


Model: Category 

Categories Table | 
---------------- | ----------------
id | integer
name | string

Model: Product

Products Table
-------------- | --------------
id | integer
name | string
category_id | integer

First Header | Second Header
------------ | -------------
Content from cell 1 | Content from cell 2
Content in the first column | Content in the second column

