## The rails app structure

Once you have the BootcampBlog project opened you should be able to see the following folders:

**app/  **

Contains the controllers, models, views, helpers, mailers and assets for your application. As this contains most of the files needed for the app, you'll be focusing on this folder a lot.
	
**bin/**

Contains the rails script that starts your app and can contain other scripts you use to deploy or run your application.

**config/**

config/	Configure your application's routes, database, and more. This is covered in more detail in Configuring Rails Applications.

**config.ru**

Rack configuration for Rack based servers used to start the application.  Rails is a Rack app.  For more information about what Rack is: http://stackoverflow.com/a/2257031


**db/**	

Contains your current database schema, as well as the database migrations.

**Gemfile and Gemfile.lock**
These files allow you to specify what gem dependencies are needed for your Rails application. These files are used by the Bundler gem. For more information about Bundler, see the Bundler website: http://bundler.io/

**lib/**

Extended modules for your application.


**log/**

Application log files.

**public/**	

The only folder seen by the world as-is. Contains static files and compiled assets.

**Rakefile**

This file locates and loads tasks that can be run from the command line. The task definitions are defined throughout the components of Rails. Rather than changing Rakefile, you should add your own tasks by adding files to the lib/tasks directory of your application.

**README.rdoc**

This is a brief instruction manual for your application. As this is the file that most code repositories read first, this is usually the first file that you edit when you start a new project.  The readme should contain important information like what your application does, how to set it up, and so on.

**test/**	

Unit tests, fixtures, and other test apparatus. For our project however, we'll be using the more popular gem called rspec thus leaving this folder unused.


**tmp/**	

Temporary files (like cache, pid, and session files).

**vendor/**

A place for all third-party code. In a typical Rails application this includes vendored gems.

If you have more questions, please ask them before moving on to the next Chapter.