## Booting up rails

Now that you've seen the prelimenary form of the rails application we'll be working on, let's fire it up shall we?

The basic requirment that we need to check is to see if the database adapter that we specified is running.  Since we created BootcampBlog with mysql as the default database, we just need to run:

>  mysql.server status

If you see that it's not running, just issue the following command:

> mysql.server start

Once that's done, issue the status check again to verify that it is indeed running (this secondary check is necessary sometimes as there are times when mysql reports that it successfully started but when you try to connect, you'll find that it actually crashed).

Since this is a new project, we need to make sure that we have a database to connect to.  Not to worry, you don't need to fire up the mysql cli for this since rails provides the tools for you.  

Just run 

> rake db:create

There will be no message to confirm that the command you just ran worked properly however :|  To verify if the database has indeed been created, log in to your mysql instance and run:

> show databases;

You should have the following tables created:

> |  |
> |--------------------------|
> | information_schema       |
> | BootcampBlog_development |
> | BootcampBlog_test        |

As you add more and more features to your application sometimes you end up adding more services that your app is dependent on like redis, memcached, mongodb, etc.  To make sure that your rails app will start, you need to make sure each of these services are running beforehand.  Of course as developers, we usually prefer to automate this but for now, we'll make do with starting each process by hand to make sure we don't forget them (and to get into the habit).

Now that we have all the prequisites running, we need to start the server.

Just issue this command on your terminal:

> rails server

You should see something like this:

> -> Booting WEBrick

> -> Rails 3.2.15 application starting in development on http://0.0.0.0:3000

> -> Call with -d to detach

> -> Ctrl-C to shutdown server

> [2014-09-25 13:48:01] INFO  WEBrick 1.3.1

> [2014-09-25 13:48:01] INFO  ruby 1.9.3 (2014-05-14) [x86_64-darwin13.0.0]

> [2014-09-25 13:48:01] INFO  WEBrick::HTTPServer#start: pid=15958 port=3000

Now open your browser and type in:

> http://localhost:3000

You will now see the default readme for all new rails applications :D