# Project Specs

## Abstract

The final project for the inDinero Bootcamp is a time tracking application.  The objective is to simplify to way we track the hours spent by employees in their day to day tasks and provide an easy to digest and comprehensive way of displaying the data).

The required specs are as follows:

For Users
    
	has a signup form
	has a login/logut screen
	Account management - the app should allow:
		- password reset
    Required Attributes:
       - email
       - password
       - First Name,  Last name

For Managers

	Managers can promote other users to manager-level
	Managers have:
	  - a way of viewing what the users see.  
	  - have a view to see the summary of time in/outs of users

The basic functionality is as follows:

    - Users are can be assigned to projects by managers
    - Projects can only be created by the managers
    - Each Projects has tasks and both the user and manager can create and update them.  However a user cannot edit a task that the manager has created
    - Once logged in users select a task and login when they start on it and logout once they're done.

For the user, the basic workflow is as follows:
    - User logins and gets redirected to a dashboard
    - User selects a project
    - User selects or creates an task for time tracking and gets redirected to the timer form
    - Manually start and stop the timer.  Users can't do anything while the timer is running except stop it.
    - After stopping, users can view their summary and/or view other projects.

Additional Notes:
    - Handling for holidays
    - If the user creates a timein/timeout, mark it as overtime
