## SQL for Kamote
###pretty format to follow :D

###What is SQL  
SQL stands for Structured Query Language, normally, this is used to access data stored in a Relational Database.

For those who don't know, a relational database is a type of database that stores the information and metadata in a two dimentional table, something like a super overglorified excel spreadsheet on steroids that doesnt forget what stuff should fall into which column.

So heres some SQL in action:

`SELECT * FROM interns WHERE brain != "Kamote"`

Neat right? Basically, what the line above does is it tells the database to get all the rows in the intern table whose brain is not Kamote

###why SQL  
SQL is a standard, no matter what kind of relational database you use, you will always see some semblance in the way you access data from them. Its like one day, all the database vendors walked into a bar and decided that there should be a standard way to access the data we store~ that way, it'd be easier to train professionals and a bunch of other cool perks that would make life easier. And thus, SQL is born.  

PS. SQL is also currently in the works for big data, i.e. MongoDB is experimenting with SQL to make it easier to access their data stores without having to go through the manual way of getting the data you need.  

###Structure of SQL databases
Before we dive into actual SQL, lets get everyone on the same page with definitions.  

A database is a collection of related tables.  
A table is a collection of records with a common metadata which is defined by the table.  
A record is a single entry in a table of the database.  

This can be quite confusing unless you already know this so let me try rephrasing that.
Imagine that you're in a typical office setup, you're a typical entry level clerk in charge of the filing cabinets.   
So lets examine the parts of the filing cabinet.  
First, you have the cabinet itself, it has drawers and stuff.  
Next, we have the drawers that hold the files and folders.  
Lastly, we have the files and folders which hold the information we want to store.  

Sound familiar? Because a database is exactly just like that.  
A database is just a neat organized way of storing tables that are in one way or another related to each other.  
A table is like a drawer in a cabinet in such that all it holds are similar records. Like you have a drawer full of employee biodata, each record in there is pretty much identical in structure with one another but differ only in content. 

###Using Databases

Now that we know what databases here, lets do a quick dive into SQL.  

Note to self: write example here...
suppose we pop a database console...  

```sql
SHOW databases;   //first, we ask MySQL what databases it has inside
USE farm;         /*
                   *next, we pick a database to use
                   *we can't access a table and its contents without first selecting a table
                   */
                   
SHOW tables;      //this command lists all the tables available inside the database
DESCRIBE kamote;  //this command is used to list the structure of the table(its attributes, datatypes, etc.)

SELECT * FROM kamote;  //this query takes every record in the kamote table and the displays it
```

###basics of SQL  
For the basics, you only need to concern yourselves with two types of SQL queries  
  a. DDL - Data Definition Language  
  b. DML - Data Manipulation Language  
  c. QUERIES~  

DDL is the subset of SQL that governs creation, alteration and deletion of tables, databases and other metadata while DML is the subset of SQL that governs accessing, updating, creating and deleting new records in the table

Simple right? 
If you're playing with tables and databases, you're using DDL  
If you're playing with the data in the table, you're using DML  

Ok so lets start with DDL  
The basic DDL statements are as follows  
* CREATE
* ALTER
* TRUNCATE
* DROP

`CREATE` obviously is the one responsible for creating tables. 

```sql
CREATE TABLE kamote(
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR(255),
  age INTEGER,
  date_of_birth DATE
);
```

Lets take a minute to ponder upon the beauty of SQL.  
...  
It doesn't take a genius to find out what you're trying do here. SQL is like that. Its exactly as you see it. So we're creating a table named kamote, that has an id, name age and date of birth. Neat right?  
P.S. You can also use the CREATE statement to create a database like this: `CREATE DATABASE kamote;`

`ALTER` is the statement we use to to modify the table structure. Lets say on day 1, your boss tells you to make table world with atributes air, land and water. Then 3 days later, they say lets add light to the world table. What then? Do we delete the whole table then make it anew? NO! ALTER to the rescue!

```sql
ALTER TABLE world ADD light BOOLEAN;
```

And there was light! Such a beauty right?  

`DROP` and `TRUNCATE`, they're two very similar commands. The only thing they have in common is that they completely and utterly destroy ALL the data stored in the table. The difference? DROP destroys the table along with the data and TRUNCATE just destroys the data, leaving the table structure intact for future use.  

```sql
DROP TABLE humanity;

TRUNCATE TABLE humanity;
```

Again, DROP in this case would destroy all of humanity including the table structure making it impossible to add new records to humanity  
TRUNCATE on the other hand would still keep the humanity table intact allowing us to replenish the content of the humanity table without having to recreate the table from scratch  

Activity Time!  
--Part 1--  
Imagine that you're a space cowboy programmer, living on the edge of space as outlaw programmers that work for rebels and stuffs  
One day, Darth Shear(a powerful cyber plutocrat) decides to hire you. He asks you to make a database of all the planets that he intends to destroy and all the Weapons of Mass Destruction that he keeps in his arsenal. (Feel free to imagine what fields these tables should include, and don't forget to create the database!)

--Part 2--  
Darth Shear comes back to your space bar steaming with anger, he apparently hired some Keldorian baboons for enconders which ended up entering wrong data into his brand new database. He now asks you to destroy all the data inside, and while you're at it, he also told you to add a new field in his WeaponsOfMassDestruction database, he wants you to add a boolean for self destruct button since he wants to know which weapons of his has this utility built in.


Now onto DMLs, the bread and butter of most database cave dwellers  
There are three DML statements available at our disposal  
  a. INSERT  
  b. UPDATE  
  c. DELETE  



###The lucrative SELECT QUERY  
  structure  
  where  
  sorting  
  grouping  
