## HTML and CSS

### Getting Started
HTML files are nothing more than simple text files, so to start writing in HTML, you need nothing more than a simple text editor.
If you are using Windows you can use Notepad, which is usually found in the start menu under Programs in Accessories. In this lesson, we are going to use sublime.

### WHat is HTML?
 > HTML is an abbrevaition of "HyperText Mark-up Langauage". It is the mother tongue of your browser.
 > Basically it is a language, which makes it possible to present information (e.g. scientific research) on the Internet. What you see when you view a page on the Internet is your browser's interpretation of HTML. It is used to make websites
 
### Tags, Attributes, and Elements
**Tags** is the basic structure of an HTML document, which surround content and apply meaning to it.
 
 Change your document so that it looks like this:
 ```html
 <!DOCTYPE html>
 <html>
 <body>
   This is my first web page
 <body>
 </html>
 ```
The first line on the top, *<!DOCTYPE html>*, is a **document type declaration** and it lets the browser know which flavor of HTML you're using (HTML5, in this case). It's very important to stick this in - If you don't, browsers will assume you don't really know what you're doing and act in a very perculiar way.
 
`<html>` is the opening tag that kicks things off and tells the browser that everything between that and the `</html>` closing tag is an HTML document.

`<body>` and `</body>` is the main content of the document that will appear in the browser window.

**Closing Tags**
The `</body>` and `</html>` put a close to their respective elements.

**Attributes** appears inside the opening tag and their values sit inside a quoatatoin marks. They look something like `<tag attribute="value">Label</tag>`.

**Elements** gives structure to HTML document and tells the browser how you want your website to be presented. Generally elements consists of a start tag, some content, and an end tag.

Example:
`<em>Emphasised text. "em" is short for emphasis</em>`

### Page Titles
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>My first web page</title>
</head>
<body>
  This is my first web page
</body>
</html>
```
> "My first web page" will appear on a tab or the title bar of the window.

> The text that you put in between the title tags has become the title of the document.

### Paragraphs
> Now that you have the basic structure of HTML documnt, you can mess around with the content a bit.
`<p>` tag is used for paragraphs.

Example:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>My first web page</title>
</head>
<body>
  <p>This is my first web page</p>
  <p>I am excited.</p>
</body>
</html>
```
The two lines will now appear on two lines because the browser recognizes them as separate paragraphs.

Think of the HTML content as if it were a book - with paragraphs where appropriate.

### Emphasis
> You can emphasize text in a paragraph using `<em>` (empahsis) and `<strong>` (strong importance).

Example:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>My first web page</title>
</head>
<body>
  <p>Yes, that really <em> is </em> exciting. <strong>Warning:</strong> level of excitement may cause head to explode.</p>
</body>
</html>
```
Note: Traditionally, browsers will display `<em>` in *italics* and `<strong>` in **bold** by default but they are not the same as `<i>` and `<b>` tags.

### Line breaks
> The line breaks tag can also be used to separate lines.

Example:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>My first web page</title>
</head>
<body>
  This is my first web page<br>
  I am excited.
</body>
</html>
```
There's no content involved in breaking lines so there is no closing tag.

### Headings

Example:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>My first web page</title>
</head>
<body>
  <h1> This is my first web page<h1>
  
  <h2> What is this? </h2>
  <p> A simple page put together using HTML.</p>
</body>
</html>
```

Note that the h1 tag is only used once, as the main heading of the page. h2 to h6, however, can be used as often as desired, but they should always be used in order, as they were intended. For example, an h4 should be a sub-heading of an h3, which should be a sub-heading of an h2.

### Lists
> There are three types of list; unordered list, ordered lists and definition lists.

#### Unordered List and Ordered List
Unordered lists and ordered lists work the same way, except that the former is used for non-sequential lists with list items usually preceded by bullets and the latter is for sequential lists, which are normally represented by incremental numbers.

The `<ul>` tag is used to define **unordered lists** and the `<ol>` tag is used to define **ordered lists**. Inside the lists, the `<li>` tag is used to define each list item.

Unordered List Example:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>My first web page</title>
</head>
<body>
  <h1>My first web page</h1>

  <h2>What this is</h2>
  <p>A simple page put together using HTML</p>

  <ul>
    <li>To learn HTML</li>
    <li>To show off</li>
    <li>Because I've fallen in love with my computer and want to give her some HTML loving.</li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
```

Ordered List Example:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <title>My first web page</title>
</head>
<body>
  <h1>My first web page</h1>

  <h2>What this is</h2>
  <p>A simple page put together using HTML</p>

  <ol>
    <li>To learn HTML</li>
    <li>To show off</li>
    <li>Because I've fallen in love with my computer and want to give her some HTML loving.</li>
  </ol>
</body>
</html>
```
#### Definition Lists
List of terms and decsriptions (such as glosarry), a definition list is your go-to-element

There doesn’t have to be one `<dt>` followed by one `<dd>`, there can be any number of either. For example, if there are a number of words that have the same meaning, there might be a number of dt’s followed by one dd. If you have one word that means various different things, there might be one dt followed by several dd’s.



